SFWRITER.COM Inc.
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

(((sawyer@sfwriter.com)))&|&& URL-em &&||&& TXT-em &&|||&
XXX-XXX-XXXX 

110,000 words 
(exclusive of front and back matter)





	THE OPPENHEIMER ALTERNATIVE


By Best-Novel Hugo and Nebula Award-Winner

ROBERT J. SAWYER








	Draft:  &@&





A Personal Request to the Art Director

	(Please do NOT set in type)

If you choose to depict J. Robert Oppenheimer on the book's 
cover, may I please ask you not to depict him smoking?  Yes, 
Oppie was a chain smoker, but I lost my younger brother to lung 
cancer and find such imagery disturbing (it was hard enough for 
me to write all the smoking Oppie does in this novel).  Many 
thanks!


	Notes for the Copyeditor

	(Please do NOT set in type)



I update these notes with every novel.  Even if you've previously 
copyedited one of my books, please review the notes below.  Thank 
you.

Feel free to regularize any deviations from the following 
standards, but please query on all other changes.


REFERENCES

My standard reference for spelling and word usage is The American 
Heritage Dictionary, Fifth Edition (unabridged), 2011 (American 
Heritage is listed in CMS 16 section 7.1 as an acceptable 
choice).

I've decided I much prefer AHD to WEB 11, which had been my 
choice for some earlier novels.  Note that AHD relied on a usage 
panel of professional writers, including, when he was alive, 
Isaac Asimov; the panel was chaired by linguist Steven Pinker.

You can access this dictionary online for free:

(((https://ahdictionary.com))))&|&& URL-ahd &&||&& TXT-ahd &&|||&

However, although The Chicago Manual of Style may advise to 
"normally opt for" the first spelling listed in the dictionary of 
choice, I consider the selection between variant spellings (such 
as "aesthetics" and "esthetics" or "advisor" and "adviser") to be 
the author's prerogative.  I prefer the former spellings in each 
of the foregoing pairs, and also prefer "café" to "cafe," 
"cliché" to "cliche," "cross-section" to "cross section," "naïve" 
to "naive," "naïveté" to "naiveté," and "disruptor" (well 
established as the usual spelling in science-fictional contexts) 
to "disrupter."  If my preferred spelling is listed in my 
preferred dictionary, whether as an equal variant (which American 
Heritage shows following the word "or") or an unequal variant 
(which American Heritage shows following the word "also"), please 
don't change it to another form.  Note that I use both the terms 
"atomic bomb" and "atom bomb" deliberately; please do not 
regularize.

If suggesting a change to my usage, please query with CMS edition 
and section number or Words Into Type page reference.


PERIOD FLAVOR

This novel is set mostly in the 1940s and 1950s.  Spelling 
conventions have changed in the last seventy-five-odd years, 
largely at the bullying behest of the Chicago Manual of Style.  
To retain the period flavor of this novel, I've deliberately 
chosen to hyphenate many prefixes and suffixes that in 
contemporary works might be set solid.  For instance, J. Robert 
Oppenheimer's actual job title, in all historical documents, was 
"Co-ordinator of Rapid Rupture" (not "Coordinator").  

To add to the overall feeling of historical authenticity, I've 
chosen to use these spellings throughout:

	anti-electron
	anti-matter
	anti-Semite
	co-author
	co-operation
	co-ordinates
	co-ordinator
	counter-clockwise
	counter-espionage
	counter-intelligence
	cross-examining
	extra-terrestrial
	Hallowe'en
	house-warming
	in-falling
	lower-case
	multi-armed
	off-site
	post-war
	pre-eminent
	pre-emptive
	re-evaluation
	pre-war
	re-examine
	semi-circle
	space-time
	table-top
	time-like
	twig-like
	war-time
	world-line
	world-view

For the same reason, I'm also retaining the diphthong in 
archaeology and palaeontology, and am writing policy maker, space 
flight, and space ship as two words.

Today, we would commonly write of a voyage "from the Earth to the 
Moon and then on to Mars."  However, prior to the Space Age, our 
planet and its natural satellite were almost always referred to 
by uncapitalized nouns, and I've adhered to that usage in the 
text:  "from the earth to the moon and then on to Mars."

Those long-gone decades predate modern attempts (of which in 
other contexts I heartily approve) toward gender-neutrality and 
gender-inclusivity in language.  Therefore, I'm adhering here to 
the old practices of using blond for males and blonde for females 
(as both adjective and noun), and using only "he" where today we 
might write "he or she."

I'm also treating "Jr." as a parenthetical, as it was back then:  
Leslie Groves, Jr., not Leslie Groves Jr. (which is what the 17th 
edition of CMS would have us write).

I've chosen to include the periods in acronyms and academic 
degrees, as they would indeed have been commonly styled this way 
in the 1940s and 1950s:

	A.E.C.
	A.U.
	F.B.I.
	I.A.S.
	I.D.
	J.P.L.
	M.D.
	M.E.D.
	M.I.T.
	N.K.G.B.
	Ph.D.
	R.H.I.P.
	S.S.
	T.N.T.
	U.C.B.
	U.K.
	U.N.
	U.S.
	U.S.A.

EXCEPTION:

In the acronym-heavy scene in which Feynman is reading the 
dossier on von Braun, I've deliberately left out all the periods 
(a) for readability and (b) because this particular real 
historical document rendered them that way.


ITALICS

I use italics for:

Emphasis

The titles of publications, movies, and television series

Some verbatim transcriptions of thoughts, especially when there 
might be ambiguity about whether the text is thought or narration

All non-English words and phrases being consciously used as 
non-English, and all Latin phrases (which are usually 
affectations) even if they appear in English dictionaries: 
"au revoir" and "en route" (French), "a cappella" (Italian), and 
"per se" (Latin) are all italicized.  Please note however that I 
do not italicize foreign-source single words (not phrases) that 
have been wholly co-opted into standard English, and whose usage 
doesn't constitute an affectation: words such as "milieu" or 
"liaison" (French) and "trek" (Afrikaans) are not italicized, but 
bon voyage -- being a phrase -- is.  (My rationale is that "au," 
"revoir," "en," "cappella," "bon," and so on are not valid 
English words on their own, and only the italicizing linking them 
to the preceding or following text turns them into a meaningful 
phrase.)

The Chicago Manual of Style 14th Edition (1993), section 5.4, 
says, "Generally, punctuation marks are printed in the same style 
or font of type as the word, letter, character, or symbol 
immediately preceding them."

I agree with this.  However, starting with CMS's 15th Edition 
(2003), section 6.3 ("Punctuation and font: primary system"), 
changed this, saying: "All punctuation marks should appear in the 
same font -- roman or italic -- as the main or surrounding text, 
except for punctuation that belongs to a title or an exclamation 
in a different font."  (A similar point is made in CMS's 16th 
edition in section 6.2.)

I prefer the older standard set by CMS's 14th Edition (or as 
still allowed for print publications under CMS 16 section 6.4 
("Punctuation and Font -- aesthetic considerations")) as it does 
indeed respect the aesthetics of how type actually looks on the 
printed page.  In particular I want question marks, exclamation 
marks, colons, and semicolons immediately following italicized 
words to always be italicized, along with any closing quotation 
mark that follows them: Look out! not Look out! and "Say what?" 
not "Say what?" or "Say what?"

EXCEPTIONS:

Although the names of sailing vessels and spaceships are 
italicized, if they are being used in the possessive form the 
following apostrophe and the letter s are not italicized: "the 
Titanic's crew."

I do not italicize an em dash even if it immediately follows 
italicized text, unless the em dash is the end of a paragraph or 
is included in italicized dialogue.

If the first word in a sentence is italicized, and that word is 
preceded by a quotation mark, I also italicize that quotation 
mark.

When letters of the alphabet appear as words in the manuscript, 
I've italicized them except (per CMS 16 section 7.63) when the 
letters are meant to suggest shapes: He drew a T in Scrabble 
while he was wearing a T-shirt.  However, I don't italicize 
letters when they are used for spelling: "That word is spelled 
c-a-t."


PUNCTUATION

I use serial (Oxford) commas.

I use commas before terminal too and around internal too, but I 
don't use commas with close appositives when the name is a single 
word: I write "her husband John" but, except in long lists (as in 
the Acknowledgments), "her husband, John Smith."

I deliberately do not precede "suddenly" with a comma; the comma 
negates the rapid effect.  I write, "Suddenly a bomb exploded," 
not "Suddenly, a bomb exploded."

Except for Biblical and Classical names, I form the possessive of 
names ending in s by adding apostrophe-s.

I use three (never four) periods for ellipsis points.  My 
rationale is that an ellipsis in dialog indicates a trailing off 
(an incomplete sentence, which, since it is incomplete, has no 
terminal punctuation).  Likewise, sentence fragments ending in an 
em dash (denoting an interruption or abrupt change of thought) 
are also incomplete and therefore are not followed by terminal 
punctuation.

I almost always hyphenate compound adjectives (phrasal 
adjectives).  

However, I do not treat color specifications as components of 
compound adjectives.  I write "green phosphor line," not 
"green-phosphor line," "orange vinyl upholstery," not 
"orange-vinyl upholstery," and so on.

Please note that according to CMS 15 section 7.90, compound 
chemical terms are not hyphenated, even when they are being used 
as adjectives: it is correct to write, as I do, "carbon dioxide 
gas."

I do not usually employ the genitive or possessive case with 
gerunds in constructions such as in the following examples 
(although in dialogue individual characters may deviate from 
this); pedantry may be appropriate in academic contexts, but it 
can be disruptively formal in fiction.  I write "Despite Atlanta 
also being home to CNN" not "Despite Atlanta's also being home to 
CNN," and "Recall Dr. Goldsmith giving testimony" not "Recall Dr. 
Goldsmith's giving testimony."  Please do not adjust my usage.

I have set as closed pairs or triplets of initials in a person's 
name:  "I.I. Rabi," not "I. I. Rabi," for Isidor Isaac Rabi; 
"E.O. Lawrence," not "E. O. Lawrence," "J.R.R. Tolkien," not 
"J. R. R. Tolkien," and so on.


SPLIT INFINITIVES

I'm aware of the supposed prohibition against split infinitives; 
however, I don't agree with it.  Please do not adjust my usage; I 
prefer to boldly go where a great many writers have gone 
before ...


CAPITALIZATION

I use lower-case for the first letter in a sentence following a 
colon.


NUMBERS

I spell out all numbers that begin sentences; except for dates, 
spell out zero through one hundred (even when followed by the 
word "percent"), and use numerals for 101 and beyond, including 
years ("2019"), their two-digit abbreviations ("'19"), and 
precise times ("9:30 a.m."); when an ordinal date is mentioned in 
dialog, I spell it out as a word: I write "March 15, 2019," in 
normal text, but in dialog would write, "Beware March fifteenth 
-- it's the Ides of March!"

However, when using slang terms referring to rotational turns, I 
always spell out "one-eighty" and "three-sixty," and in dialog 
when I want to differentiate the pronoun, I write "a hundred and 
fifty," rather than "150" (which would normally be read as "one 
hundred and fifty").

I don't usually spell out numbers containing decimal points, even 
in dialog (I use "123.45" rather than "one hundred and 
twenty-three point four five"). 

I do not use apostrophes to pluralize numbers: "1990's" is 
possessive of the year 1990 ("1990's best novel was ..."), not a 
reference to the decade that ran from 1990 to 1999 (I write: "The 
1990s were a wonderful time").


PROFANITY

The term "damn it" is stronger than "dammit."  I use both 
deliberately for specific effect; please do not adjust my usage.


VERBALIZED PAUSES

I use "um" and "umm" to represent verbalized pauses of different 
lengths.  I use both deliberately for specific effect; please do 
not adjust my usage.  I treat "hmmm" as speech, and don't 
italicize it, unless I'm doing so for emphasis (in other words, 
sometimes it is italicized and sometimes it isn't, and that's a 
deliberate choice on my part).


"NOW," "HERE," AND "AND THEN"

Even when writing in the past tense, I sometimes use the terms 
"now" and "here."  This is unexceptionable grammatically: The 
American Heritage Dictionary, for instance, gives the following 
as one of the definitions of "now," employing a past-tense 
example: "At this point in the series of events; then: The ship 
was now listing to port."

I use "and then" (including sometimes to begin a sentence) when 
perhaps either just "and" or "then" could have been employed; I 
do this for reasons of cadence and personal style.  Please do not 
modify my usage.

I have a fondness for stream-of-consciousness narrative devices, 
including ending one paragraph with "and" followed by an em dash, 
and beginning the next with an em dash and "and" (with a 
lowercase a) followed by a description of a suddenly changed 
circumstance or mental state.  These devices are employed 
deliberately; please do not modify them.


Praise for The Oppenheimer Alternative

"My favorite Sawyer book of all; the extrapolation is as 
brilliant as the history. An extremely clever science-fictional 
tale that grows naturally out of the research done by extremely 
smart people on the way to the development of the atomic age. 
They will live for you after you are done reading this book; this 
is what they were really like. A solid award contender!" 
--Amazing Stories

"Sawyer does a magnificent job. Every individual pops right off 
the page, fully integrated both into their era and amongst 
themselves. The whole book is rich in emotional depth. This fine 
novel makes explicit its relevance to the present." --Locus

"I loved it! I know the history of this period well and I'm one 
or two degrees of separation from many of these people. Sawyer's 
portrayals ring true to me. Getting to read this early was a 
treat!" --Lee Smolin, bestselling author of The Trouble with 
Physics

"Impressive use of scientific and historical detail and Sawyer's 
characterization of the man himself pull back the layers of 
Oppenheimer's morals, genius, and grief. Science fiction fans 
will devour this smart speculative tale." --Publishers Weekly

"You can always count on Sawyer, a storyteller of the first 
order, for a good read. The Oppenheimer Alternative delivers on 
that count, but it's also a book that explores, on a human level, 
the sort of bigger questions raised by world-changing events, 
both real and imagined." --The Toronto Star

"With typical stylistic verve and a remarkable degree of 
research, Sawyer has crafted a world that is an apt and accurate 
reflection of our own while also folding in the shifts and 
changes that create this alternate reality. The Oppenheimer 
Alternative is precisely the kind of well-constructed and 
thoughtful speculative fiction that we've come to expect from 
Robert J. Sawyer. It's a fascinating premise brought to fruition 
by one of our most gifted sci-fi authors." --The Maine Edge

"An imaginative restructuring of a phantasmagoric life into an 
alternative phantasmagorical story. Oppenheimer fans will be 
intrigued." --Martin J. Sherwin, co-author of the Pulitzer 
Prize-winning biography American Prometheus: The Triumph and 
Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer

"A truly science fictional work of alternate history which turns 
on the decisions -- and discoveries -- of the great physicists 
who wrote the history of the 20th century: Einstein, Fermi, 
Gödel, and Oppenheimer. They are the vividly realized, 
all-too-human characters who people this novel, and give its 
brilliant speculations human life and blood. I read this book at 
a gulp, and you should too -- now I'm going to go read it again. 
Bravo!" --S.M. Stirling

"You might think you know what to expect from a Robert J. Sawyer 
book: something set in a near-future world similar to our own; 
real people dealing with the social implications of ideas from 
the edges of current science; fascinating, well-dramatized 
exploration of philosophical and ethical matters. The Oppenheimer 
Alternative, an alternate history thriller set in the opening 
years of the atomic age, might seem a bit of a departure. Not to 
worry, this book has everything a reader wants from Sawyer. 
Well-drawn alternate history, rigorous SF thriller, social 
commentary, redemption narrative -- The Oppenheimer Alternative 
reimagines one of the most influential lives of the twentieth 
century. Well worth reading." --Analog Science Fiction & Fact

"Incredibly realistic: the characters, locations, the era, and 
even the science. I felt like I was back in Los Alamos -- and I 
should know: I worked there! Breathlessly riveting; Sawyer pulls 
it off masterfully." --Doug Beason, former Associate Laboratory 
Director, Los Alamos National Laboratory

"The feel and detail of the Manhattan Project figures is deep and 
well done. I knew many of these physicists, and Sawyer nails them 
accurately." --Gregory Benford, author of The Berlin Project and 
Edward Teller's graduate student

"An excellent blend of hard science, alternate history and the 
inner workings of one of the key men of the 20th century. Highly 
recommended." --Sci-Fi Bulletin

"Hugo and Nebula award-winning author Robert J Sawyer balances 
effortless prose with extensive research to create a novel so 
well-crafted that the lines between reality and alternate reality 
blur. Combining a whole lot of science with a whole lot of 
speculation, The Oppenheimer Alternative succeeds as an amazing 
border-hopper between the reality of science and the boundless 
imagination. It's the perfect addition to hard science fiction 
collections." --Aurealis

"I enjoyed it tremendously! Really great, a page turner. I was 
hooked from the beginning to the end. Another fine addition to 
the Sawyer canon!" --Andre Bormanis, producer, The Orville and 
Cosmos

"An expert and engrossing knitting of the threads of history, 
with genuine characters of the mid 20th Century, to weave out a 
compulsive fictional narrative." --Jem Rolls, author of the play 
The Inventor of All Things about Leo Szilard

"Sawyer portrays brilliantly and poignantly the struggles of the 
scientists who started it all and were consequently obliged to 
bear an unbearable burden." --James Christie, Chair, Project 
Ploughshares, member organization of the Nobel Peace 
Prize-winning International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons

"Every single character in this book is a real person. That's 
right, all of them. Even some of the dialogue is real. This is 
one of the most ambitious books I've come across. I can't imagine 
the amount of research that went into giving each character a 
believable voice and personality (actually, I can, the 
bibliography runs 30 pages on my phone), but this is Robert J. 
Sawyer so maybe I shouldn't be surprised. In some ways, it 
reminded me of the play Copenhagen by Michael Frayn, with more 
thrills, cool rockets and a doomsday scenario to boot." --Tor.com

"You can call this alternate history or alternate astrophysics 
(or both). Whatever term you choose, it's a terrific story." 
--Eric Flint

"A novel as expansive as the physics (and physicists) under whose 
watch the original Project Orion was launched." --George Dyson, 
author of Project Orion: The Atomic Spaceships 1957-1965

"A wealth of detail lends Sawyer's novel the grounded 
believability necessary to pull off a fictionalization of events, 
speculating on the inner lives of the players, the meaning behind 
the discoveries they made, and the philosophical impact thereof. 
Sawyer employs a no-nonsense style reminiscent of that of Isaac 
Asimov or Ben Bova, which makes the narrative easy to navigate. 
The result is a realistic and intriguing look at Oppenheimer and 
his work." --Booklist, journal of the American Library 
Association

"There are some writers who, even if they do not write the same 
book over and over again, write very similar books. Not so with 
Robert Sawyer, who pairs an enormous imagination with extensive 
research. Whether writing about a dinosaur Galileo, atheist 
Neanderthals, or a self-aware World Wide Web, Sawyer makes his 
characters, and the world in which they live, come alive. If 
there is one thing Sawyer's books do have in common, in addition 
to their overall excellence, it is his concern for morality and 
determining the right thing to do. In this book, this concern is 
reflected in discussions over the nuclear bomb and later keeping 
the end of the world a big secret from ordinary people. Fans of 
historical novels set in the recent past will love The 
Oppenheimer Alternative. Fans of alternate history who are 
willing to wait a while for the speculative content will find 
their patience rewarded. Readers interested in science, and how 
scientists interact also will find much to enjoy." --SFRevu

"Sawyer has outdone himself! No one could have taken on this 
project with such gusto and with such a search for the truth as 
this outstanding author. I've never read such a complete and 
thrilling account of Oppenheimer's world." --Jonas Saul


	Praise for Robert J. Sawyer

"A new Robert J. Sawyer book is always cause for celebration." 
--Analog Science Fiction and Fact

"Sawyer not only has an irresistibly engaging narrative voice but 
also a gift for confronting thorny philosophical conundrums.  At 
every opportunity, he forces his readers to think while holding 
their attention with ingenious premises and superlative 
craftsmanship." --Booklist

"Can Sawyer write? Yes -- with near-Asimovian clarity, with 
energy and drive, with such grace that his writing becomes 
invisible as the story comes to life in your mind." --Orson Scott 
Card, author of Ender's Game

"Robert J. Sawyer is by any measure one of the world's leading 
(and most interesting) science-fiction writers.  His fiction is a 
fascinating blend of intellectually compelling big ideas and 
humane, enduring characters." --The Globe and Mail

"Sawyer, an articulate fountain of ideas, is the genre's northern 
star -- in fact, one of the hottest SF writers anywhere.  By any 
reckoning Sawyer is among the most successful Canadian authors 
ever." --Maclean's: Canada's National Magazine

"Robert J. Sawyer is a writer of boundless confidence and bold 
scientific extrapolation." --The New York Times

"Sawyer's books -- always rich in science, action, and profound 
thinking -- never fail to surprise, delight, and cause us to 
transcend our ordinary thinking.  I've read Crichton, Asimov, 
Heinlein, Clarke, King, and Koontz -- and Sawyer outdoes them 
all." --Clifford A. Pickover, author of Time: A Traveler's Guide

"A polished, exciting writer.  Sawyer writes with the scientific 
panache and grandeur of Arthur C. Clarke and the human touch of 
Isaac Asimov." --Quill & Quire

"Cracking open a new Robert J. Sawyer book is like getting a gift 
from a friend who visits all the strange and undiscovered places 
in the world.  You can't wait to see what he's going to amaze you 
with this time." --John Scalzi, author of Old Man's War

"Sawyer is Canada's answer to Michael Crichton." --The Toronto 
Star

"No reader seeking well-written stories that respect, emphasize 
and depend on modern science should be disappointed by the works 
of Rob Sawyer." --The Washington Post

"Sawyer is a terrific writer.  He can write about the most 
sophisticated science while giving readers the room to understand 
what's happening and follow the plot." --Winnipeg Free Press









	Note for the Copyright Page


Copyright ☻ 2020 by Robert J. Sawyer.

	Books by Robert J. Sawyer

NOVELS
Golden Fleece
End of an Era
The Terminal Experiment
Starplex
Frameshift
Illegal Alien
Factoring Humanity
FlashForward
Calculating God
Mindscan
Rollback
Triggers
Red Planet Blues
Quantum Night
The Oppenheimer Alternative

The Quintaglio Ascension Trilogy
Far-Seer
Fossil Hunter
Foreigner

The Neanderthal Parallax Trilogy
Hominids
Humans
Hybrids

The WWW Trilogy
Wake
Watch
Wonder

COMPLETE SHORT FICTION
Volume 1: Earth
Volume 2: Space
Volume 3: Time

For book-club discussion guides, visit (((sfwriter.com)))&|&& 
URL-sf &&||&& TXT-sf &&|||&







	Dedication



For

Alisha Souillet

Who made this a better book
And me a better person


	Acknowledgments

	Special thanks to the late Manhattan Project physicist and 
Nobel laureate Luis W. Alvarez, who graciously spent an afternoon 
with me in 1983, a meeting I'll never forget; to Dr. Doug Beason, 
former Associate Laboratory Director, Los Alamos National 
Laboratory; to Alex von Thorn, whose great-uncle, Brigadier 
General Thomas F. Farrell, was an assistant to Manhattan Project 
leader General Leslie R. Groves; to Liz Cano, who first 
introduced me to the work of Leo Szilard via Jem Rolls's one-man 
play The Inventor of All Things, and to Jem Rolls himself.
	Many thanks to Sharon Fitzhenry and Richard Dionne at 
Fitzhenry & Whiteside's Red Deer Press imprint in Canada and to 
Shahid Mahmud and Lezli Robyn at Arc Manor's CAEZIK SF & Fantasy 
imprint in the United States: they rose to the almost-impossible 
challenge of getting this book out in time for the seventy-fifth 
anniversary of the birth of the atomic age.  Special thanks to my 
editor, Adrienne Kerr -- it was wonderful to be working with her 
again.  Adrienne used to be my editor at Penguin Random House 
Canada, but Fitzhenry & Whiteside engaged her on a freelance 
basis to edit this book; you can hire her, too: see 
adriennekerr.net.
	Thanks for help along the way to Alisha Souillet, Roy 
Ashton, Gabor Bagi, Gregory Benford, Jerry Bokser, Dave Brohman, 
David De Graff, Paddy Forde, Marcel Gagné, James Alan Gardner, 
Gerald I. Goldlist, Dominick Grace, Judith Hayman, Steve Hoban, 
Matt Kennedy, Michael Lennick, W. Thomas Leroux, Chris Lotts, 
Donald Maass, Mickey Mickkelson, Brian Morey, W. Maynard 
Pittendreigh, Jensenne Roculan, Robin Rowland, Daryl Rybotycki, 
Stephen W. Saffel, Martin L. Shoemaker, James Snyder, Laura 
Frankos Turtledove, Vince Gerardis, Alex Wellerstein, Elizabeth 
Westbrook-Trenholm, Andreas Wolz, and George Zebrowski.
	Beta readers for this novel were Robb Ainley, Keith 
Ballinger, Denise Bérubé (who read the manuscript while in 
Hiroshima!), Ted Bleaney, Andre Bormanis, Aleksandar Bradaric, 
Stephanie Bradfield, Wayne Brown, Nixie Byrd, Jon Caruana, James 
Christie, David Livingstone Clink, Fiona Reid Cosgrove, Melissa 
L. Cox, Irene Dutchak, Andrew Edmunds, Talisa Edmunds, Shayna 
Feldstein, Hugh Gamble, Michael Jäger, Andrew Zimmerman Jones, 
Herb Kauderer, Wouter Lagerweij, Clare Levijoki, Joel Lee 
Liberski, John Lynch, Michael Mariani, Erik Maronde, Ryan 
McCarty, Margareta Mina, Andrea Mitchell, Chris Nolan, Colin 
Porter, Karin Porter, Lou Prosperi, Natalka Roshak, Judy Sanders, 
Larry Schoeneman, Georgina Scott, Lee Smolin, Lynne 
Stonier-Newman, Lou Sytsma, Gord Tulloch, Keith Ward, Bret Wiebe, 
Stephanie Wilson, and Len Zaifman.
	For the first time in over twenty years, I've written a 
novel without first securing a publishing contract.  My Patreon 
supporters made that possible, including, most generously, 
Christopher Bair, Keith Ballinger, Kelly Barratt, Judith Bemis, 
Jennifer Blanchard, Ronda Bradley, Matt Ceccato, James Christie, 
Phillip Clark, Christine V. Connell, Nancy T. Curriden, Genevieve 
Doucette, Hugh Gamble, Gordon Getgood, James Kerwin, Gregory 
Koch, Archie Kubacki, Matthew LeDrew, Joel Lee Liberski, Gillian 
Martin, Catharine McKeever, Christina Dawn Monroe, Arioch 
Morningstar, Kel N., Anna Nelson, Chris Nolan, Andrew Olsen, Ian 
Pedoe, Ken Ray, Fiona Reid, Carol Richards, Robin Schumacher, 
Timothy W. Spencer, Ralston Stahler, Aaron Suarez, Andrew 
Tennant, Douglas Tindal, Kurt Weingarten, Scott Wilson, Joshua 
Paul Wolff, Brian Wright, and Len Zaifman.  If you'd like to join 
them in supporting my work directly, please visit 
patreon.com/robertjsawyer.
	Most of all, thanks to Carolyn Clink, the strong nuclear 
force that keeps everything from flying apart.

	Dramatis Personae 


Luis Alvarez (1911-1988): American physicist; 1968 Nobel 
laureate.

Stepan Zakharovich Apresyan (1914-1990): Russian diplomat and 
spy; vice consul at the Soviet Consulate in San Francisco.

Kenneth Bainbridge (1904-1996): American physicist; director of 
the Manhattan Project's Trinity test.

Hans Bethe (1906-2005): German-born American physicist; 1967 
Nobel laureate.

Patrick Blackett (1897-1974): British physicist; Robert 
Oppenheimer's tutor at Cambridge's Cavendish Laboratory; 1948 
Nobel laureate.

Niels Bohr (1885-1962): Danish physicist; 1922 Nobel laureate.

Vannevar Bush (1890-1974): Head of the U.S. Office of Scientific 
Research and Development.

James F. Byrnes (1882-1972), Secretary of State under Harry S. 
Truman.

Barbara Chevalier (1907-2003): First wife of Haakon Chevalier.

Haakon Chevalier [«HOKE-on SHEV-al-EE-eh»] (1901-1985): 
American-born professor of French literature at the University of 
California at Berkeley and translator at the Nuremberg Trials.

Robert Christy (1916-2012): Canadian-born physicist.

Arthur Holly Compton (1892-1962): American physicist; 1927 Nobel 
laureate.

Edward Condon (1902-1974): American physicist.

Watson Davis (1896-1967): Editor, Science Service.

Peer de Silva (1917-1978): Manhattan Project security officer.

Major General Walter Dornberger (1895-1980): Military leader of 
Germany's V-2 rocket program.

Helen Dukas (1896-1982): Einstein's live-in secretary.

Freeman Dyson (1923-2020): British-born American physicist.

Albert Einstein (1879-1955): German-born Swiss/American 
physicist; 1921 Nobel laureate.

George C. Eltenton (1905-1991): British chemical engineer (or so 
it was thought at the time; actually a physicist) for Shell 
Development in California who approached Haakon Chevalier on 
behalf of Russia.

Ward V. Evans (1880-1957): Member of the 1954 Atomic Energy 
Commission security-review board.

Enrico Fermi [«FAIR-mee»] (1901-1954): Italian-born American 
physicist; 1938 Nobel laureate.  In 1942, he produced the 
first-ever controlled nuclear chain reaction at the University of 
Chicago.

Richard Feynman [«FINE-man»] (1918-1988): American physicist; 
1965 Nobel laureate.

Lloyd K. Garrison (1897-1991): American lawyer; represented 
Oppenheimer before the 1954 Atomic Energy Commission 
security-review board.

Kurt Gödel (1906-1978): Austrian-born American logician.

Gordon Gray (1909-1982): Chairman of the 1954 Atomic Energy 
Commission security-review board.

General Leslie R. Groves (1896-1970): Head of the Manhattan 
Project.

Bourke Hickenlooper (1896-1971): United States senator and past 
chairman of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy.

Verna Hobson (1923-2004): Robert Oppenheimer's secretary at the 
Institute for Advanced Study.

J. Edgar Hoover (1895-1972): Director of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation.

Dieter Huzel (1912-1994): German rocketeer working under Wernher 
von Braun.

Lt. Lyall Johnson (1914-2006): American counter-intelligence 
officer stationed on the campus of the University of California, 
Berkeley.

Lyndon B. Johnson (1908-1973): 36th President of the United 
States, in office 22 November 1963 to 20 January 1969.

George Kistiakowsky (1900-1982): Ukrainian-American chemist, 
leader of explosives group at Los Alamos.

Anne Wilson Marks (1924-2006): Robert Oppenheimer's secretary at 
Los Alamos.

Herbert Marks (1907-1960): Robert Oppenheimer's lawyer (and 
Anne's husband).

Lt. Col. (and later Major General) Kenneth Nichols, Ph.D. 
(1907-2000): General Groves's assistant, and, later, general 
manager of the Atomic Energy Commission.

J. Robert Oppenheimer (1904-1967): American physicist, scientific 
director of the Los Alamos site of the Manhattan Project; 
director of the Institute for Advanced Study.

Katherine "Kitty" Oppenheimer (1910-1972): German-American 
botanist; wife of Robert Oppenheimer.

Katherine "Tyke" Oppenheimer (1944-1977): Robert and Kitty's 
younger child, known as "Toni" when she was older.

Peter Oppenheimer (1941-    ): Robert and Kitty's older child.

William S. "Deak" Parsons (1900-1953): Associate director of the 
Los Alamos laboratory under Oppenheimer; weaponeer on the Enola 
Gay; promoted to rear admiral following the war.

Lt. Col. Boris Pash (1900-1995): American military intelligence 
officer; commander of the Alsos Mission into Germany.

Isidor Isaac Rabi [«ROB-ee»] (1898-1988): Austrian-born American 
physicist; 1944 Nobel laureate.

Roger Robb (1907-1985): Attorney for the Atomic Energy 
Commission.

C. Arthur Rolander, Jr. (1920-2017): First, the Atomic Energy 
Commission's deputy director of security, then vice president of 
General Atomic.

Robert "Bob" Serber (1909-1997): American physicist; Robert 
Oppenheimer's close colleague.

Rita "Pat" Sherr (1916-1997): wife of physicist Rubby [«ROO-bee»] 
Sherr; looked after Robert Oppenheimer's daughter.

Robert Sproul (1891-1975): President of the University of 
California, Berkeley.

Henry L. Stimson (1867-1950): Secretary of War during both World 
Wars.

Lewis L. Strauss [«Straws»] (1896-1974): Chairman of the Atomic 
Energy Commission.

Leo Szilard [«LAY-o SIL-ard»] (1898-1964): Hungarian-born 
physicist.

Jean Tatlock, M.D. (1914-1944): American Communist Party member; 
Robert Oppenheimer's mistress.

Ted Taylor (1925-2004): Mexican-born American physicist who 
worked at Los Alamos and then headed the Orion project.

Edward Teller (1908-2003): Hungarian-born physicist, often called 
"the father of the hydrogen bomb."

Charles Tobey (1880-1953): United States senator.

Harry S. Truman (1884-1972): 33rd President of the United States, 
in office 12 April 1945 to 20 January 1953.

Harold Urey (1893-1981): American physical chemist; 1934 Nobel 
laureate.

Joseph Volpe (1914-2002): legal counsel for the Atomic Energy 
Commission.

Magnus von Braun (1919-2003): younger brother of Wernher von 
Braun.

Wernher von Braun [«VAIRN-er fon Brrrown»] (1912-1977): German 
rocketeer.

John von Neumann [«von NOY-man»] (1903-1957): Hungarian-born 
American mathematical physicist.

Henry A. Wallace (1888-1965): vice president of the United States 
under Harry S. Truman.



Author's Note

	Every character in this novel was a real person and, with the 
exception of Peter Oppenheimer, is now deceased.  The Manhattan 
Project and Project Orion both really existed as described here, 
and the Institute for Advanced Study still exists.

	The chapter-head quotes are all real, and, 
thanks to the published recollections of the 
participants, official transcripts, illicit 
recordings, and so on, some of this novel's 
dialog is real, too.







	That is what novels are about.  There is a 
dramatic moment and the history of the man, 
what made him act, what he did, and what sort 
of person he was.  That is what you are 
really doing here.  You are writing a man's 
life.
	--I.I. Rabi, testifying at Robert 
Oppenheimer's security hearing


	Prologue

	What pithy words should one use to sum up the life of J. 
Robert Oppenheimer before dropping the urn with his ashes 
overboard?
	Do you wax poetic about the precocious child who, at age 
twelve, gave a lecture to the venerable New York Mineralogical 
Club?  Perhaps you'd discuss his rise to fame in 1945 as "the 
father of the atomic bomb" -- and then lament the McCarthy Era 
witch-hunt that later sought to strip his security clearance?  
You might even include a word or two about his supposedly quiet 
twilight overseeing the monastic Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton.
	In the end, Kitty Oppenheimer, the compact alcoholic for 
whom Robert had been the fourth -- albeit longest-serving -- 
husband, said nothing while raindrops fell like bombs from the 
heavens.  She let go of his urn seconds after dangling it over 
the gunwale of the motorboat that she, their twenty-two-year-old 
daughter, and two friends had taken out from the Oppenheimer 
beach house on Hawksnest Bay that monochromatic afternoon in 
February 1967.
	Surprisingly, the urn didn't sink at once.  Rather, it 
bobbed up and down as if empty, the waves themselves giving the 
storied physicist a final sinusoidal eulogy before the container, 
taking on water, at last sank beneath the choppy surface.

	Chapter 1

	1936


	I have to explain about Oppie: about every 
five years, he would have a personality 
crisis; he would change his personality.  I 
mean, when I knew him at Berkeley, he was the 
romantic, radical bohemian sort of person, a 
thorough scholar ...
	--Robert R. Wilson, American physicist

	"You're bad luck for me," said Haakon Chevalier.  "I hope 
you know that."
	Robert Oppenheimer looked at his friend, seated next to him 
on the pink-and-green living-room couch as the party bustled 
about them.  Oppie's sense was the exact opposite: Hoke had 
brought him nothing but good fortune, including getting him into 
this offbeat rooming house here on Shasta Road.  "Oh?"
	"Absolutely.  When I go places without you, I'm considered 
the attractive one."
	Oppenheimer made a small chuckle.  Chevalier, who had just 
turned thirty-five, was three years his senior, and was indeed 
movie-star handsome: gallant, as befitted his last name, and long 
of face, with wide-spaced eyes and sandy hair swept back in a 
slight pompadour.
	By comparison, Oppie knew he himself was scrawny, his tall 
body angular, his coarse black hair a wild nimbus, and his 
duck-footed gait awkward -- one friend had described it as a 
constant falling forward as if he were forever tumbling into the 
future.
	"See that one over there?" continued Hoke, with a subtle 
nod.  "She hasn't glanced at me once since we got here, but 
you --"  Chevalier shook his head in good-natured exasperation.  
"It's those goddamn eyes of yours, I tell you.  Fucking opals."
	Oppie was used to compliments about his pale blue eyes: he 
often heard them called "transparent" or "luminous," but this 
metaphor was new to him.  He smiled as he turned to look at the 
woman Hoke had indicated, and --
	And, my God, he'd seen that lovely face before -- he was 
sure of it.  But where?  "Wow," said Oppie softly.
	"Wow, indeed," agreed Hoke.  "And she keeps looking your 
way.  You should go over and say hello."
	"I ... um ..."
	"Oh, for Pete's sake, Robert, go!  You study the mysteries 
of the universe; girls are simple by comparison."
	Hoke taught French literature at the University of 
California's Berkeley campus; Oppie was a professor of physics 
there.  Normally, members of such diverse faculties would have 
little to do with each other, but Oppie loved French poetry, and 
the two men had become great friends.  One advantage Hoke had was 
a lot of female students -- he'd married one, in fact -- whereas 
in Robert's circles, women were rare.  "Come on," said Hoke.  
"Give me a story to tell Barb when I get home.  Go try your 
luck."
	Luck.  Einstein said that God didn't play dice with the 
universe -- but, then again, God probably wasn't itching to get 
laid.  "All right already," Oppie said, unfolding himself from 
the couch.  Of course, he couldn't just go up and say hello, but 
Mary Ellen, his landlady, was swirling by in one of her 
floor-length batik dresses.  She threw many parties, often as 
fund-raisers.  This one was for the Republicans in Spain -- or 
maybe it was for the Spanish Nationalists?  Whoever the good guys 
were, anyway; Oppie had come downstairs from his room for donuts 
and drinks, not the cause.
	"Say, Mary Ellen, I wonder if you might --"
	"Robert!  So good of you to pull your nose out of your books 
and join us!  But your glass is empty.  Let me --"
	"No, no; I'm fine.  But if you could ..."  He gestured 
feebly at the busty young woman seated by the fireplace.
	"Ah!" said Mary Ellen, her wide face splitting in a grin.  
"Yes, of course!"  She took Oppie's hand and pulled him across 
the crowded room.  "Jean," she said, and the woman looked up, 
"this is my best tenant -- oh, hush, Fred; you know I love you, 
too!  This is Robert.  He teaches physics.  Robert, Jean here is 
studying to be a doctor."  Mary Ellen managed to make an art-deco 
chair appear out of nowhere and maneuvered Robert onto it so that 
he was facing Jean.  "Now, let me get you a drink!"
	"A doctor," said Oppie, impressed, smiling at Jean.
	"Yes.  A psychiatrist, in particular."  Jean's voice was 
warm.  She was, as he'd noted from across the room, beautiful -- 
even more so close-up.  "I'm fascinated by Freud," she continued.  
"Do you know his work?"
	Well, well: look at those dice.  Six the hard way!  "I do 
indeed.  In fact, I know Ernest Jones."
	"Oh my!" said Jean.  "Really?"
	"Yes.  We, ah, met when I was at Cambridge in 1926."  Jones, 
a great friend of Freud, was the first English-speaking 
practitioner of psychoanalysis and had become its chief proponent 
in the English world.
	"Tell me -- my God, tell me everything about him!"
	Mary Ellen fluttered by again, giving Oppie a bourbon and a 
wink, then went upon her way.  "Well," said Oppie, "he was 
practicing in Harley Street ..."  As he spoke, he continued to 
study her smooth, classically beautiful face and striking green 
eyes, emeralds to his opals.  Jean wore her black hair short and 
had a slight dimple in her chin.  She was probably a decade 
younger than he was.
	They talked for most of an hour, and the conversation 
slipped easily from topic to topic.  He was enthralled by that 
hauntingly familiar beauty of hers and by her nimble mind and 
ready wit, and yet she was mercurial.  One moment she'd seem 
animated and boisterous, the next fragile and sad.  Still, 
against a noisy background of someone banging away on the piano, 
dozens of overlapping conversations, and the clink of glasses, he 
listened attentively, although at one point he had to hold up his 
hand to stop her.  "My family," she said, "moved out here from 
Massachusetts just before the crash, and --"
	"You were in an accident?"
	She looked at him for a moment, puzzled.  "No.  The 
stock-market crash."
	Oppie shook his head slightly.
	"The stock-market crash of 1929.  The beginning of the Great 
Depression."
	"Oh -- ah, yes.  Yes, of course."
	"You don't know, do you?"  Jean looked amazed.  "Where have 
you been?"  He wished she'd gone on to add the words all my life, 
but instead she finished by observing: "Born with a silver spoon 
in your mouth, were you?"
	"Well, I -- I mean, my father did all right."  Then he 
added, as if somehow it explained his ignorance: "He invested, 
but mostly in art, not stocks."
	She tilted her head again, and the light from the porcelain 
table lamp hit her just so, and he suddenly realized where he'd 
seen that face before.  Oppie's favorite book was Baudelaire's 
poetry collection Les Fleurs du mal.  The shape of Jean's face 
and the curve and length of her nose were identical to that of 
the woman in the etching accompanying Baudelaire's heartbreaking 
"Une Martyre" in the glorious 1917 edition.  He frowned, ousting 
the thought.  That etching was gruesome: the woman's head had 
been severed, a beauty cut down in the flower of youth as her 
older lover traveled the world.
	The evening was ending at last, and Oppie, four drinks in, 
was ready to ask the young lady out.  "And so, Miss ..." he 
began.
	"Tatlock," she said, and the crisp syllables hit him like 
bullets.
	"Are ... are you related to John Tatlock?"
	"He's my father."
	"John Tatlock?  The medievalist at Berkeley?"
	"Yes, why?  Do you know him?"
	Oh, yes, thought Oppie.  John Strong Perry Tatlock was an 
expert on Geoffrey Chaucer, a towering presence at Berkeley 
faculty-association meetings, a loud voice often heard booming 
across the Faculty Club dining hall -- and a raging anti-Semite.  
That wasn't unusual at Berkeley; when Robert had tried to get his 
student Bob Serber a job there, the physics chairman had said 
that having one Jew in his department was quite sufficient.  
But ... damn.
	"Ah," said Oppie, his stomach knotting; he hadn't mentioned 
his own last name.  He got up from the funky chair.  "Well," he 
said sadly, "it was nice meeting you."  He made his way toward 
the staircase that led up to his lonely room.
#
	Jean was present at the next party Mary Ellen hosted, and 
the one after that, each time just as lovely, just as magnetic.  
Finally, her father's prejudice be damned, Oppie mustered the 
courage to ask her to dinner.
	"Where would you like to go?" she replied, and he was 
flustered again.  Did that mean her acceptance was a given, or 
that it was now contingent on him naming a suitably posh place?  
"I, um, well --"
	"Oh, it doesn't matter!" she said, smiling. "Do you like 
spicy?"
	"Very much so."
	"There's a place over in San Francisco, the Xochimilco Café.  
Do you know it?"
	He shook his head.
	"Well, good!  Then it can become our place!  Saturday night?  
Or -- or do you ...?"  The question, he realized, was a belated 
reference to his Jewishness.
	"No, Saturday is fine."
	And it was.  The café, which had a name more appropriate to 
the Southwest he'd loved in his youth than the Northern 
California he was in now, was a dive.  Not that it mattered; 
she'd been right that money wasn't a concern for him -- he'd 
happily have taken her to the most-expensive seafood place on the 
wharf.  But the booth they found was suitable for conversation, 
the carne adovada agreeably piquant, and the tequila strong and 
plentiful.
	She was, he discovered, a member of the Communist Party and 
wrote for its newspaper, The Western Worker.  When she spoke of 
downtrodden people, of the fight for liberty -- common coin on 
the Berkeley campus, stuff he'd previously tuned out as 
background noise -- he found himself listening, nodding, and 
repeatedly interjecting, "Yes, yes, yes!"
	That night, he walked her home.  After a block, she reached 
over and took his hand.  When they arrived at the entrance to the 
small building she lived in, they could hear a jazz recording 
through a neighbor's open window; she told him it was Benny 
Goodman's latest, "The Glory of Love."  Oppie pulled her near 
and, bending his head down, he kissed her for the first time, 
starting slowly, gently, but, as she responded, growing more and 
more passionate.
	They began dating regularly.  A few years before, he'd given 
a talk entitled "Stars and Nuclei" to the Caltech astronomy club; 
he'd studied the largest and smallest of objects, but, until 
Jean, he'd missed seeing the human world all around him.
	Still, it wasn't long before he learned of the darkness that 
chased her inner light -- her mood swings, her nightmares; she 
was a chimera, angel and demon in one body, the would-be 
psychiatrist who had long seen a psychiatrist of her own.  
Despite it all, he came to love her unwaveringly, and she, with 
the deeper feelings both high and low that heaved and tossed her 
spirit, perhaps loved him even more.
	After only a few months, they were engaged ... and then, 
bewilderingly, Jean broke it off.  "Not ready," she said, and 
"Too soon."  They continued to date, though, and he finally 
worked up the courage to ask her a second time to marry him.  She 
agreed, but then, weeks later, once again changed her mind: she 
did love him, she insisted, but said he deserved more, better, 
and his protestations failed to sway her.  Robert, heartbroken, 
started seeing other women, including Kitty, the petite 
temptress, the flirtatious vixen, the skilled horsewoman who 
could, or so it seemed, break any stallion.  To his surprise at 
the time, she was soon pregnant.  He did the honorable thing -- 
did his duty -- and married her.
	But it was winsome, bittersweet Jean Tatlock, not Kitty, who 
was forever in his heart, his mind, the soulmate he could never 
have.

	Chapter 2

	Six Years Later: 1942


	Question: What is an optimist?  Answer: One 
who thinks the future is uncertain.
	--Leo Szilard

	Leo Szilard, still cherubic at forty-four, had been warned 
about this visit.  General Leslie Groves was coming to the 
Metallurgical Laboratory, the drab code name given to the 
facility at the University of Chicago that studied the 
fissionable elements uranium and plutonium.  The man who'd been 
merely a colonel days ago had apparently leveraged a promotion to 
go along with being appointed head of -- what the hell were they 
calling the overall bomb effort now?  Ah, yes: "The Manhattan 
Engineer District."
	Leo suspected he'd soon have some obscure code name himself.  
His preference would be "Martian Number One."  Enrico Fermi, who 
believed the universe should be teeming with intelligent life, 
had exhorted Leo to explain the absence of these advanced 
visitors, which, for lack of a generic term, Enrico had taken to 
calling "Martians."  Leo had quipped, "Oh, we are here -- but we 
call ourselves Hungarians."
	Szilard had already bestowed nicknames on others, which he 
mostly kept to himself.  His largely platonic girlfriend Trude, a 
dozen years younger, was "Kind," the German for "child."  Eugene 
Wigner, a fellow Martian, was "Pineapple Head," in honor of his 
oddly prolate noggin.  And he'd decided the best name for this 
general who had burst into their seminar room in Eckart Hall was 
"Bumpy," commemorating both his lumpy exterior and his bumptious 
nature.  Leo couldn't fault a person for being overweight; his 
own fondness for pastries and rich sauces had made him, as Trude 
affectionately chided from time to time, more than a little 
rotund.  But a man's clothes should fit, for God's sake, and this 
blustering martinet's jacket seemed at least one size too small.
	The general and his military aide had been brought to see 
this group -- the Met Lab's fifteen most-senior scientists -- by 
Arthur Holly Compton, the jutting-jawed director of the 
laboratory.  The seminar room was large and luxurious with 
built-in glass-fronted bookcases, plush maroon leather furniture, 
and two blackboards, one wall-mounted and another that had been 
wheeled in.  A central mahogany table was strewn with papers, 
dog-eared journals, and coffee mugs.
	Thirty-two-year-old Luis Alvarez, lanky and intense, was 
trying to answer the general's slew of questions by writing 
equations on the built-in blackboard, but that oaf had the gall 
to interrupt him.  "Just a second, young man.  In the third 
equation, you've got the exponent as ten-to-the-minus-five, but 
then it magically becomes ten-to-the-minus-six on the next line."
	"Oh, yes, yes," replied Alvarez sheepishly, rubbing out the 
mistake with his thumb and writing in the correct value.  "Slip 
of the chalk."
	"That raises a question," Groves said to the whole group.  
"Your estimates for how much fissionable material you'll need -- 
how accurate are they?"
	Leo, with his shoeless feet propped up on a vacant chair, 
shrugged slightly.  "Within a factor of ten."
	"A factor of ten!" exploded Groves.  "That's idiotic!  
That's like telling a wedding caterer to prepare for a hundred 
guests when the real number could be anywhere from ten to a 
thousand.  No engineer can work with sloppy figures like that."
	"General ..." said Leo, giving him his newfound title in 
hopes of placating the brute, "you have to understand --"
	"No," snapped Groves.  "All of you have to understand.  This 
isn't a theoretical project; it's a practical one.  I have to 
build actual working bombs."  He took a deep breath then let it 
out loudly.  "Now, you lot may think engineers are just 
technicians" -- Leo had the good sense not to interject -- "and 
you may know that I don't have a Ph.D.  Colonel Nichols here has 
one, but I don't.  But let me tell you that I had ten years of 
formal education after I entered college -- ten full years.  I 
didn't have to make a living or give up time for teaching.  I 
just studied.  That'd be the equivalent of about two doctorates, 
wouldn't it?"
	Leo swung his feet off the chair and leaned forward.  "Sir," 
he said, the word almost a hiss, "I would never claim your rank 
-- even if you have only just attained it -- as my own.  But 
forget doctorates; everyone in this room, save you, has one."
	"Leo ..." cautioned Compton, thin eyebrows drawn together in 
a don't-do-this glare.
	"No, no, no," said Szilard.  "We're trotting out credentials 
here, are we not?  And you, Arthur, you are none other than the 
winner of the 1927 Nobel Prize in physics."  Leo locked his gaze 
on Groves.  "Maybe you saw him on the cover of Time a few years 
ago?"  Szilard then indicated a slender, balding man seated on 
the opposite side of the table.  "And him?  That's Enrico Fermi.  
He won the 1938 Nobel.  And next to me?"  He pointed to an 
egg-headed man with a mustache.  "Say hello to James Franck, the 
1925 Nobel laureate.  As for me, I have collaborated with -- and 
share patents with! -- Albert Einstein."
	Groves rose, fuming.  "I'm going to Berkeley," he snapped, 
"but I'll be back in a few days."  He jabbed an accusatory finger 
at the blackboard.  "And I expect precise answers when I return."  
His footfalls on the hardwood floor shook the bookcase glass as 
he stormed out.
	Leo got up, turned to face his colleagues, and spread his 
arms.  "I warned you how it would be if the military were allowed 
to take over!  How can we work with people like that?"
	Compton had calmed down a bit.  "Well, once Groves gets to 
Berkeley, Oppie will set him straight on the theoretical issues."
	Szilard frowned.  Oppenheimer?  Too eager to please, too 
much of a climber.  Oh, sure, charismatic in person -- who hadn't 
felt that?  But as the champion of science and reason against 
Bumpy Groves?  "May God have mercy on our souls," Leo said, 
shaking his head.
#
	Robert Oppenheimer gazed out the mammoth window in the 
university president's living room, lost, as often, in thought.  
Of course he was thinking about the vexing problem of isotope 
separation, but --
	Isotopes were the same element but different -- both this 
and yet each separately that.  Just as it was with the women in 
his life, both beautiful and brilliant, but different, too: 
Kitty, who demanded to be satisfied, and Jean, whom he could 
never fully satisfy.  The same and yet not: Kitty, who had been 
married to someone else when she first began dating Robert and 
who he'd now learned from friends had bragged that she'd gotten 
him to marry her "the old-fashioned way, by getting pregnant," 
and Jean, still there, still in his social circle, occasionally 
still in his arms, who ran away from commitment.
	Robert hadn't been blind as time went on.  His former 
landlady, that whirlwind of energy named Mary Ellen, and the 
delicate, moody Jean, now indeed an M.D., were more than casual 
friends.  In just one of many ways in which Jean was pulled in 
multiple directions simultaneously, Mary Ellen -- always 
confident where Jean was often diffident; always a confidant, as 
close as Oppie himself was -- had also taken Jean to bed.
	"Robert?"
	The voice had been that of the reception's host, President 
Sproul.  He turned.  "Yes?"
	Sproul -- panther-lean, bespectacled, and wearing a gray 
three-piece suit -- indicated the uniformed man next to him, and 
Oppie beheld the visitor.  "General Leslie Groves, meet Dr. J. 
Robert Oppenheimer."
	The term "fission" describing how a uranium nucleus could 
split into two had been borrowed from biology, and Oppie had a 
sudden flash of micrographs he'd seen of a dividing cell: an 
entity pinched in the middle to form bulbous halves.  Groves's 
belt was the constriction and an ample gut billowed out above and 
below it.
	The general was almost as tall as Oppie, with an elongated 
head weighed down by jowls and crowned by swept-back hair.  
Groves sported a short, bristly mustache that had grayed at 
either side, lending the more-prominent dark part -- 
inadvertently, Oppie was sure -- a Hitlerian aspect.  Binary 
stars adorned each side of his khaki collar.  Oppie offered his 
hand, and Groves shook it firmly.  "You're the head theoretician 
here," the general said as if it were an accusation.
	Oppie nodded.  "My actual job title is -- if you can believe 
it -- `Co-ordinator of Rapid Rupture,' but, yes, that's right."
	"I'm a nuts-and-bolts man myself," said Groves.  His voice 
reminded Oppie of the sound stones made in his lapidary tumbler.  
"An engineer."
	Oppie nodded amiably.  "You're in charge of building the 
Pentagon."  The massive new structure in Virginia was nearly 
finished.
	The general's eyebrows creased his forehead, clearly 
impressed that Oppie knew this.  "Indeed I am."  Oppie left 
unspoken the fact that Groves had also been in charge of building 
the internment camps for Japanese Americans.  The army man looked 
around the vast room, apparently uncomfortable with the opulent 
surroundings.  "I was hoping that I'd have earned my pick of 
assignments after the Pentagon -- I wanted to see action overseas 
-- but they gave me this thing."
	"This thing," Oppie knew, was being in charge of the 
atomic-bomb project, including the work here at Ernest Lawrence's 
Radiation Laboratory and that at Arthur Compton's Metallurgical 
Laboratory in Chicago.
	President Sproul apparently knew the way to this particular 
man's heart, at least: "Lunch will be served momentarily."  
Groves smiled at that, and Oppie smiled at Groves's smile.
	"I'm glad they put an engineer in charge," Oppie said, 
turning on the charm as Sproul was beckoned away by another 
guest.  "We scientists can spend far too much time 
woolgathering."
	The general's eyes, a darker blue than his own, fixed on 
Oppie.  "Are you free this afternoon?  I'd like to talk to you 
some more."
	It was all falling into place; Kitty would be so pleased.  
"Your wish is my command, General."
