Dot Commands

Additional formatting information is recorded in WordStar files 
through means of "dot commands."  Dot commands are instructions 
that are preceded (in the first position in the line) by a period 
<2Eh> and stand alone as the only entry on that line.  (See the 
WordStar documentation for exact descriptions of each dot 
command.)

In the table below, the codes in the "Usage" column indicate the 
following:

	M	Affects only merge printing.
	I	Affects only indexing.
	T	Affects only table of contents.
	P	Affects printing or merge printing.
	E	Affects editing, printing, or merge printing.

In most cases, the dot commands that affect editing show some 
effect on the screen as the command is typed or changed.  As the 
cursor is moved forward through the document, WordStar stores 
enough information about the command so that the previous state 
can be restored when the cursor is later moved backwards.  There 
is a limited amount of storage for this information and it is 
controlled with the User Area variable DSTKSZ.

Versions prior to 4.0 require whole numbers as arguments to dot 
commands that require numbers (subscript roll, page offset).  
With version 4.0, math was allowed in the arguments for easier 
entry of complex page layouts.  In version 5.0, the ability to 
specify measurements in inches was added.  In version 5.5 
revision C, measurements in points and centimeters were allowed.  
Inches in 5.0 were specified using the double quote only.  In 
5.5C, inch measurements were allowed with 'I' or 'IN'.  
Centimeters are specified as 'C' or 'CM', and points with 'P' or 
'PM'.  Upper and lower case are allowed with these.  Most dot 
commands that take their arguments as number of lines or columns 
will allow measurements as well.  Refer to the WordStar 
documentation to find out which dot commands accept measurements 
as arguments. 



The present interpretation of dot commands is:

	Command  Usage   Meaning

	.AV	M	Ask for variable.  Requests the user to  
enter data from the keyboard at print 
time for a specific variable.

	.AW	E M	Aligning and word wrap ON/OFF.  Enables 
or disables aligning and word wrap at a 
specific point in the document.  Used 
primarily to prevent changes to tables.

	.BN	P	Bin select.  Selects one of the sheet
	                 feeder bins at print time. The number 
	                 of sheet feeders is defined in the
	                 PDF.

	.BP	P	Bidirectional print ON/OFF.  Enables and 
disables bidirectional printing.  If the 
printer does not have bidirectional 
printing capability, this command is 
ignored.

	.CC	E P	Conditional column break.  Like the .CP 
command, but works with columnar breaks 
instead.  If the number of lines 
following the conditional column break 
command fit on the current page, then 
there is no effect, otherwise, a 
columnar break will occur.

	.CO	E P	Columns.  Allows the user to specify the 
number of columns and optionally, the 
gutter width in columns or inches.

	.CP	E P	Conditional page break.  If there are 
less than the number of lines specified 
remaining on the page, then a page break 
is generated.  If the number of lines 
following the conditional page break fit 
on the current page, then there is no 
effect.  Takes the line height changes 
into account.

	.CS	P	Clear screen and display message.  This 
command is used to clear the screen 
during printing.  If a message follows 
the .CS, it is displayed on the first 
screen line below the Print Menu.

	.CV	E P	Convert note type.  For further areas in 
the document, all notes of the first 
type specified will be treated as notes 
of the second type.  Works with 
comments, footnotes, and endnotes.

	.CW	P	Character width.  This command allows 
the user to specify the width of the 
characters in 1/120 inch increments.  
This width takes effect on the next line 
of text.  Either the normal (^N) or  
alternate (^A) character width is 
changed depending which is in effect.  
The default is 12 (12/120ths is 10 
characters per inch).

	.DF	M	Data file.  This merge print command is 
used to specify the file name which 
holds data that will be merged into 
text.  The data file may be in comma 
delimited format, a dBASE file, or a 
Lotus 123, Symphony, Quattro, or VP- 
Planner worksheet.  The user may also 
optionally change the data separator 
character for that file.

	.DM	P	Display a message. Displays a message on 
the screen at print time.  If printing 
in the background, .DM's can "scroll 
off" the screen while it is hidden from 
the user.

	.E#	E P	Set endnote value.  Specifies the new 
value for endnote numbering.

	.EI	M	End if.  Indicates the final spot in a 
merge print document affected by a .IF 
command.  There must be one .EI for 
every .IF command.

	.EL	M	Else.  Used for the "else" case after 
using a .IF command.  .EL commands are 
optional.

	.F#	E P	Set footnote numbering type and value.  
Specifies the new value for footnote 
numbering.  Optionally specifies whether 
footnote numbering should restart every 
page or be consecutive throughout the 
document.

	.FI	P	File insert.  Prints the specified file 
at that point in the document.  .FI 
commands may be nested up to 7 levels 
deep.  .FI files can be in ASCII, 
WordStar, or Lotus 123, Symphony, 
Quattro, or VP-Planner worksheets.

	.FM	P	Footer margin.  The number of blank 
lines from the end of the text on a page 
to the first footer line.  Default is 2.  
The sum of the footer margin plus the 
number of footer lines must be less than 
or equal to the bottom margin. 

	.FO or F1	P	Footer.  The text following the 
command .F1 will be printed as the first 
footer line on this and all subsequent 
pages.  A .FO (or .F1) followed by one 
or zero blanks  cancels the footer line.  
The footer uses the character width and 
line height in effect at the time 
the .FO (or .F1) command is encountered 
in the text.  .FO can optionally specify 
even or odd numbered page footers.

	.F2	P	Second footer.

	.F3	P	Third footer.

	.F4	P	Fourth footer.

	.F5	P	Fifth footer.

	.GO	P	Go to top or bottom of document.

	.HE or H1	P	Header.  The text following the 
command .H1 is printed as the first 
header line on all subsequent pages.  If 
the header command is one of the first 
dot commands on a page it takes effect 
for that page, otherwise it affects the 
following pages.  A .HE or .H1 followed 
by one or zero blanks cancels the header 
line.  The header uses the character 
width and line height in effect at the 
time the .HE or .H1 command is 
encountered in the text.  .HE can 
optionally specify even or odd numbered 
page headers.

	.H2	P	Second header.

	.H3	P	Third header.

	.H4	P	Fourth header.

	.H5	P	Fifth header.

	.HM	P	Header margin.  The number of blanks 
lines between the top of the text on a 
page and the last header line.  Default 
is 2.  The sum of the header margin plus 
the number of header lines must be less 
than or equal to the top margin.

	.HY	E P	Turn Auto-Hyphenation ON/OFF.  Enables 
or disables the hyphenator.  Starting 
with WordStar 6.0 Rev. D.

	.IF	M	If.  Used for conditional merge printing 
in conjunction with the .EL and .EI 
commands.  Only simple conditions can be 
tested using the following operators:

				=   Strings alphabetically equal.
				<>  Strings unequal.
				>   Greater than.
				<   Less than.
				#=  Numbers equal.
				#<> Numbers unequal.
				#>  Greater than.
				#<  Less than.

			.IF commands may be nested up to 255 
levels deep.

	.IG or ..	E	Ignore.  The text on the remainder of 
the line is treated as an unprinted 
comment.

	.IX	I	Index.  The text on the remainder of the 
line is put in the index.  A comma is 
used to separate a main index entry from 
a subentry.  If a dash is the first 
character following the .IX, the index 
entry is treated as a cross reference 
entry.  If a plus sign is the first 
character following the .IX, the page 
number for that index entry is printed 
in boldface.

	.KR	P	Kerning.  Adjusts space between certain 
pairs of printed characters for fonts 
that contain kerning information.

	.L#	P	Line numbering.  Specifies whether to 
turn line numbering off, or the spacing 
and position of the line numbering.  
Also optional is whether to start 
numbering at the beginning of each page 
or the beginning of the document.

	.LH	E P	Line height.  Changes current line 
height in 1/48 inch increments.  The 
default is 8/48 or 6 lines per inch.  
All lines following this command are set 
based on the current line height value.  
Optionally, an argument of 'A' or 'a' 
will turn on "auto-leading", and all 
subsequent lines will use the line 
height of the largest font in the line.

	.LM	E P	Left margin.  Determines the left edge 
of subsequent text.

	.LQ	P	Letter quality ON/OFF.  Enables or 
disables letter quality printing on dot 
matrix printers (ignored if not 
supported on the printer).

	.LS	E P	Line spacing.  Selects a line spacing of 
between 1 and 9 for subsequent typing or 
paragraph alignment.  A value of 1 is 
for single spacing, 2 for double 
spacing, etc.

	.MA	M	Math.  Stores the results of a complex 
equation in a variable.

	.MB	E P	Bottom margin.  The footer or page 
number is printed within this margin.  
The default value is 8 lines.

	.MT	E P	Top margin.  The number of lines from 
the beginning of the page to the 
beginning of printed text.  The header 
is printed within this margin.  Default 
value is 3 lines.

	.OC	E P	Centering ON/OFF.  When ON, further 
lines in the document will be centered 
within the left and right margins until  
a .OC OFF command is encountered.

	.OJ	E P	Output justification ON/OFF.  Command 
which turns right justification ON or 
OFF for subsequent typing or paragraph 
realignment.  When OFF, text is ragged 
at the right margin.  When ON, text is 
flush right.

	.OJ	C	Center.

	.OJ	R	Right flush.

	.OP	P	Omit page number.  At print time no page 
numbers are printed unless the "#" has 
been used in footers or headers.

	.P#	E P	Paragraph number.  Specifies the initial 
value and/or the format to use for 
paragraph numbering.  Also optionally 
specifies whether compound or outline 
numbering is to be used.

	.PA	E P	Page break.  Begin a new page here.

	.PC	P	Page column. Indicates the column at 
which the page number will be printed.  
This is active only when the footers are 
not in use and page numbering is turned 
on.  If the column specified is 0, then 
the page number is centered between the 
margins in effect where the .PC command 
is given.

	.PE	P	Print endnotes.  When encountered during 
printing, endnotes will be printed at 
this point in the document.

	.PF	P	Paragraph realignment while printing.  
May be ON, OFF, or DIS (for 
discretionary).  When ON, subsequent 
paragraphs are realigned as they are 
printed.  When OFF, paragraphs are not 
realigned.  When DIS, paragraphs are 
realigned only when merge print data is 
substituted in the document.  Paragraphs 
are aligned using the left, right, and 
paragraph margins currently in effect.

	.PG	P	Number pages.  At print time the page 
number is printed at the bottom of the 
page unless a footer overrides it.  
Usually used to restore page numbering 
after being turned off with .OP.

	.PL	E P	Page length.  The total number of lines 
in a page assuming 6 lines per inch.  An 
eleven inch page contains 66 lines.

	.PM	E P	Paragraph margin.  The left margin to 
use for the first line of every  
subsequent paragraph.  Used for both 
regular and hanging indents.

	.PN	E P	Page number.  The current page number.

	.PO	P	Page offset.  The number of print 
columns from the left edge of the paper 
to the left margin of text.  The current 
setting of character width (.CW) deter 
mines the actual amount of 
indentation.  .PO can optionally specify 
even or odd number page offsets.

	.PR	P	Printer information.  Currently used to 
select the print orientation for laser 
printers (use .PR OR=L for landscape, 
and .PR OR=P for portrait).

	.PS	P	Proportional spacing ON/OFF.  Subsequent 
text is to be printed using a 
proportional font.

	.RM	E P	Right margin.  Determines the right edge 
of subsequent paragraphs.

	.RP	M	Repeat.  Command to repetitively print 
copies of a document.  The .DF command 
may interfere with the .RP command.

	.RR	E P	Ruler.  Embeds a ruler line to be used 
for subsequent typing and alignment.  
The text following the .RR is the exact 
image of the ruler line above the text 
on the screen.  A .RR with a # (0-9) 
specifies a preformatted ruler line 
(stored in the user area).

	.RV	M	Read variable.  Merge print command used 
to read one or more of the next data 
from a file into variables.

	.SB	E P	Suppress blank lines on/off.  Starting 
with WordStar 6.0 Rev. D,  Soft lines at 
the beginning of pages will be 
automatically suppressed.  This dot 
command controls the display and 
printing of blank hard returns at the 
beginning of pages.

	.SR	P	Sub/superscript roll.  The increments 
(in 1/48ths of an inch) which the 
carriage is to roll up or down for sub
script and superscript printing.  
Default is 3 (3/48ths of an inch).

	.SV	M	Set variable.  Merge print command used 
to store data in a variable.

	.TB	E P	Tab stops.  Sets multiple tab stops for 
further editing/printing in the 
document.

	.TC	T	Table of contents.  The text following  
the .TC is a table of contents entry.  A 
"#" indicates where the page number is 
to go in the entry.  .TC1 through .TC9 
are used to simultaneously build nine 
other tables.

	.UJ	P	Micro justify.  Specifies whether 
subsequent lines are to be micro- 
justified at print time.  When ON, the 
white space necessary to right justify a 
line is spread in very fine increments 
evenly over the line.  When OFF, whole 
blanks are used to spread the white 
space.  When DIS, the printer driver 
decides; microjustification is not 
performed if it slows down printing 
dramatically.

	.UL	P	Continuous underlining ON/OFF.  Enables 
or disables underlining of blanks 
between words.

	.XE .XQ	P	Custom  print  control.  The  hex  pairs
	.XR .XW		following the dot command define the 
custom print control for ^E, ^Q, ^R, and 
^W encountered in the text respectively.  
The definition may include up to five 
bytes.

	.XL	P	Form feed.  The hex pairs following .XL 
define the print control string to be 
sent to eject the paper to the following 
page when printing.

	.XX	P	Strikeout character.  Redefines the 
character used for strikeouts.
